Implement deterministic cost metrics (#487)
SolarArbiter/solarforecastarbiter-core: docs/source/cost.rst

by
:py:func:`solarforecastarbiter.metrics.deterministic.time_of_day_cost`.
Similar to the constant cost, the datamodel expects `aggregation` and
`net` parameters. In this case, `cost` is an iterable of cost values
that are paired with each time given by `times`. The `fill` parameter
specifies how the costs should be extended to times that are not
included in `times`. Options for `fill` include 'forward' and
'backward'. This filling parameter also controls how values "wrap
around" midnight. For example, for a cost describing different costs
depending on a evening peak,

.. code-block:: python

    import datetime
    from solarforecastarbiter import datamodel

    cost_model = datamodel.TimeOfDayCost(
        cost=[3.3, 1.2],
        times=[datetime.time(hour=15), datetime.time(hour=20)],
        net=True,
        aggregation='sum',
        fill='forward',
    )

the value of $3.3 / unit error applies from 15:00 to just before
20:00, and the value of $1.2 / unit error applies for all other times
in the day *except* 15:00 to 20:00. The `timezone` parameter defines
the timezone the `times` are referenced in. If `timezone` is None,

> `times` is assumed to be in same timezone as the errors.

Author: In my mind, the cost is quite different from forecast/obs and using interval to describe it confuses the interval idea. For forecast/obs the interval describes a period to apply some statistic to. The cost is just some function. I don't see a relation between the forecast interval label and the cost. 

If cost has an interval label, it should be defined separately. We don't want to try and compute the same cost for different forecasts but get inconsistent answers because the interval labels are different.

defines the timezone if `datetimes` are not localized, and if
`timezone` is None, the timezone of the errors is used.

The minimum/maximum bounds of `datetimes` should cover the range of
date-times that one wants to evaluate. For example, when evaluating
the cost defined by

.. code-block:: python

    import datetime
    from solarforecastarbiter import datamodel

    cost_model = datamodel.DatetimeCost(
        cost=[1.3, 1.9, 0.9, 2.0],
        times=[datetime.datetime(2020, 5, 1, 12, 0),
               datetime.datetime(2020, 5, 2, 12, 0),
               datetime.datetime(2020, 5, 3, 12, 0),
               datetime.datetime(2020, 5, 4, 12, 0)],
        net=True,
        aggregation='sum',
        fill='forward',
        timezone='UTC'
    )

errors in the timeseries before 2020-05-01T12:00 are not included in
the final calculation.

Error Band Cost
===============

The error band cost model is defined using :py:class:`.ErrorBandCost`
and implemented for deterministic forecasts by
:py:func:`solarforecastarbiter.metrics.deterministic.error_band_cost`.
Each of `bands` is a :py:class:`.CostBand` that describes the range of

> errors the band applies to and the parameters for one of the costs
> above. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
errors the band applies to and one of the cost models
above. For example,
```

    cost_model = datamodel.ErrorBandCost(
        bands=[
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(-5.0, 20.5),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=33.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='sum'
                )
            ),
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(20.5, float('inf')),
                cost_function='timeofday'
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.TimeOfDayCost(
                    cost=[3.3, 1.2],
                    times=[datetime.time(hour=15), datetime.time(hour=20)],
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='sum',
                    fill='forward'
                )
            )
        ]
    )

defines a cost that will apply a constant cost of $33.0 / unit error
for all errors in the range [-5.0, 20.5]. For errors > 20.5, the time
of day cost applies. The errors within each band are aggregated
according to the `aggregation` and `net` parameter of the band
parameters, but the total cost is the sum of all error bands.

> Band error ranges are evaluated in order and any errors outside the

Reviewer: in order they are specified or in order of minimum band value?

Author: specified

Author: will clarify

list of ranges *are not evaluated*. Thus, for the model described by

.. code-block:: python

    from solarforecastarbiter import datamodel

    cost_model = datamodel.ErrorBandCost(
        bands=[
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(-5.0, 5.0),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=2.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='mean'
                )
            ),
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(-10.0, 10.0),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=4.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='sum'
                )
            )
        ]
    )

errors in the range [-5, 5] have cost of $2.0 / unit error. Errors
that are outside [-5, 5] but within [-10, 10], that is errors in the

> range [-10, 5) or (5, 10] have a cost of $4.0 / unit error. Errors

Reviewer: would the exact same behavior happen with the following?

```python
        bands=[
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(-5.0, 5.0),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=2.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='mean'
                )
            ),
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(-10.0, -5.0),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=4.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='sum'
                )
            ),
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(5.0, 10.0),
                cost_function='constant',
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.ConstantCost(
                    cost=4.0,
                    net=True,
                    aggregation='sum'
                )
            )
        ]
```

Reviewer: If yes, it might be good to explicitly state that (and test that - I haven't looked at them yet). It's certainly more convenient to specify fewer bands to accomplish the same thing.

Author: Yes, that is certainly the idea.

                cost_function='timeofday'
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.TimeOfDayCost(
                    cost=[5.1, 0.3],  # decremental cost
                    times=[datetime.time(16, 0), datetime.time(19, 0)],
                    net=False,
                    aggregation='sum',
                    fill='forward'
                )
            ),
            datamodel.CostBand(
                error_range=(2, float('inf')),
                cost_function='timeofday'
                cost_function_parameters=datamodel.TimeOfDayCost(
                    cost=[7.1, 1.4],  # incremental cost
                    times=[datetime.time(16, 0), datetime.time(19, 0)],
                    net=False,
                    aggregation='sum',
                    fill='forward'
                )
            )
        ]
    )

If this cost model is used to evaluate an hourly, mean AC power
forecast, errors between :math:`\pm 2` MW are netted over the
evaluation time period and assigned a value of $1 / MWh error. For
overproduction errors over 2 MW, a decremental cost is
charged/refunded based on a time of day cost. Underproduction errors

> over 2MW are charged an incremental cost depending on the time of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over 2 MW are charged an incremental cost depending on the time of the
```
